TOPIC: CIVIC INVOLVEMENT
Content Statement 1. Opportunities for civic engagement within the structures of government
are made possible through political and public policy processes.

CONTENT ELABORATION A variety of opportunities exist at the local, state, and national
levels for students to engage with issues that appeal to them.
As students look for opportunities for civic engagement, they will:
    ●​ identify issues,
    ●​ research,
    ●​ debate
    ●​ propose appropriate solutions.

As part of this process, students will:
   ●​ devise action plans,
   ●​ examine the possible consequences of each proposed solution,
   ●​ weighing the costs and benefits of each approach.

Political Processes are related to the acquisition of governmental power and influencing
governmental decision-making.

Public Policy Processes are related to the institutional actions and procedures involved with
the government carrying out its functions.

EXPECTATIONS FOR LEARNING Devise and implement a plan to address a problem by
engaging either the political process or the public policy process.

Content Statement 2. Political parties, interest groups, and the media provide opportunities for
civic involvement through various means.

CONTENT ELABORATION
Political Parties
   ●​ Consist of organizations whose members hold similar views on public issues.
   ●​ Seek to determine public policy through winning elections
   ●​ have their members hold public office.

Interest Groups
    ●​ consist of organizations whose members hold similar views on public issues.
    ●​ seek to influence the making and execution of public policy by engaging in
       political and public policy processes.

Media
  ●​ various means of mass communication with different audiences.
  ●​ Political parties and interest groups use media to influence the political and
      public-policy processes.
EXPECTATIONS FOR LEARNING Select a political party or interest group to address a
civic issue, identify a type of media as a means of communication, then defend the
viability of the choices made in an effort to achieve a successful result in resolving the
civic issue.

TOPIC: CIVIC PARTICIPATION AND SKILLS
Content Statement 3. Issues can be analyzed through the critical use of credible sources.

CONTENT ELABORATION Researching a civic issue involves determining which sources of
information are relevant to the task, identifying the perspective or position of each source, and
evaluating the credibility of the sources.
Considerations involved with determining the credibility of sources and/or media outlets
include:
• the qualifications/reputation of the writer and/or organization;
• the circumstances in which the source material was generated;
• internal consistency and agreement with other credible sources;
• use of supporting evidence and logical conclusions; and
• evidence of bias or unstated assumptions.

EXPECTATIONS FOR LEARNING Identify the factors that determine the credibility of a
source and evaluate the credibility of a given source.

TOPIC: CIVIC PARTICIPATION AND SKILLS

Content Statement 4. The processes of persuasion, compromise, consensus building, and
negotiation contribute to the democratic process.

CONTENT ELABORATION The focus of this standard is on the group dynamics and
interpersonal skills involved in decision making. This complements the focus of other content
statements on the formal procedures and institutions of governing. The democratic process
depends on these skills for effective functioning. These skills are studied and assessed within a
real-world context as a collective, interdependent group as opposed to isolated techniques. For
example, negotiation may involve persuasion and lead to compromise. While these skills are
presented in the abstract here, students examine them in the context of the rest of the course.
No specialized or technical understanding of these terms is required; common definitions are
sufficient for examining the contributions these skills make to the democratic process.

EXPECTATIONS FOR LEARNING Explain how persuasion, compromise, consensus
building, and negotiation help the democratic process and achieve agreement and settle
differences in governing.
